Update cloud provider (#1078)
harvester/docs: docs/rancher/cloud-provider.md

  <link rel="canonical" href="https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.8/rancher/cloud-provider"/>
</head>

## Introduction

> [RKE2](./node/rke2-cluster.md) clusters can be provisioned in Rancher using the built-in **Harvester Node Driver**. Harvester provides [load balancer](#load-balancer-support) and Harvester cluster [storage passthrough](./csi-driver.md) support to the guest Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can provision [RKE2](./node/rke2-cluster.md) clusters in Rancher using the built-in **Harvester Node Driver**. This component provides [load balancer](#load-balancer-support) and [storage passthrough](./csi-driver.md) capabilities to guest Kubernetes clusters.
```

In this page we will learn:

- How to deploy the Harvester cloud provider in an RKE2 cluster.
- How to use the [Harvester load balancer](#load-balancer-support).

### Main Functionalities

The Harvester cloud provider implements a subset of the `cloudprovider` interface defined by `k8s.io/cloud-provider`. 

It supports the following core components:

1.  **[Node/Instance Lifecycle Management](#instance-lifecycle-management):**

    * Acts as the instance manager to dynamically discover and report node metadata, including node names, regions, zones, and internal/external IP addresses.

        * *Note: This serves as a critical bootstrap component for the RKE2 cluster.*

2.  **[Load Balancer Management](#load-balancer-support):**

>     * Provisions and configures load balancers automatically for Kubernetes `Service` objects of type `LoadBalancer`, routing external traffic efficiently to target nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Harvester Cloud Provider implements a subset of the `cloudprovider` interface defined by `k8s.io/cloud-provider`. It supports the following core functions:

- **[Node/Instance Lifecycle Management](#instance-lifecycle-management)**: Dynamically discovers and reports node metadata (such as node names, regions, zones, and IP addresses), acting as a critical bootstrap component for the guest cluster.

- **[Load Balancer Management](#load-balancer-support)**: Automatically provisions and configures load balancers for Kubernetes `Service` objects (type: `LoadBalancer`), routing external traffic to the correct guest nodes.
```

- `--show-full-help-on-error`: By default, the Harvester Cloud Provider silences the upstream CCM's long help output on startup errors to keep logs clean. Set this flag to `true` only when debugging startup configuration issues.

- `--management-network`: Essential for environments where guest nodes are attached to multiple VM networks. Setting this flag overrides the default "first-hit" network selection logic.

    The target Harvester cluster must run Harvester v1.9.0 or later to support the `--management-network` flag for `LoadBalancer` services, designating it as the target load balancer network. Earlier Harvester versions fall back to `first-fit` resolution to select the target network. For more information, see [Guest Cluster Load Balancer Network Resolution](../networking/ippool.md#guest-cluster-load-balancer-network-resolution).

> The following examples demonstrate how to configure `extraArgs` for various deployment scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configuration Examples

The following examples demonstrate how to configure `extraArgs` for various deployment scenarios:
```

**Example 1: Disable LoadBalancer Controller**

Use this configuration if you deploy an alternative load balancer controller and need to disable the default LoadBalancer controller provided by `harvester-cloud-provider`:

```yaml
extraArgs:
  - "--controllers=cloud-node-controller,cloud-node-lifecycle-controller,node-route-controller"
```

:::info

Disabling embedded `kube-vip`:

Because `kube-vip` is embedded within `harvester-cloud-provider` to advertise LoadBalancer IP addresses, disabling the upstream service controller typically means you should also disable kube-vip in your Helm values:

If you plan to keep `kube-vip` enabled while using an alternative load balancer controller, that third-party controller must be capable of cooperating with `kube-vip`. Integrating third-party load balancer controllers with kube-vip is outside the scope of `harvester-cloud-provider`.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Disabling the Default Load Balancer Controller

Use this configuration when deploying an alternative to the default load balancer controller of the Harvester Cloud Provider.

```yaml
extraArgs:
  - "--controllers=cloud-node-controller,cloud-node-lifecycle-controller,node-route-controller"
```

:::info important

Because `kube-vip` is embedded within the Harvester Cloud Provider to advertise load balancer IP addresses, disabling the upstream service controller typically requires disabling `kube-vip` in your Helm values as well.

If you keep `kube-vip` enabled while using an alternative load balancer controller, ensure the controller is compatible with `kube-vip`. Integrating third-party load balancer controllers with `kube-vip` is outside the scope of the Harvester Cloud Provider.

:::
```

**Example 2: Multi-Network / Multi-IP Configuration with Exclusions (Recommended)**

When guest cluster nodes are booted with multiple networks, dual-stack IP addresses, or multiple IPv4 addresses on a single interface, default `first-hit` selection logic can cause non-deterministic IP reporting.

> The following scenarios demonstrate how to use `extraArgs` to handle complex networking setups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Multi-Network and Multi-IP Configurations (Recommended)

When guest cluster nodes use multiple networks, dual-stack IPs, or secondary IPv4 addresses on a single interface, the default `first-hit` selection logic can cause non-deterministic IP reporting.

The following scenarios demonstrate how to use `extraArgs` to handle complex networking setups:
```

**Example 2.1 : Multi-Network Environments (Network Selection)**

> When cluster nodes are attached to multiple Harvester VM networks (e.g., `default/vlan-100` and `default/vlan-200`), `harvester-cloud-provider` might randomly select an interface. Setting `--management-network` forces the provider to only report node IPs from the specified network (e.g., `default/vlan-100`). Additionally, the provider will allocate LoadBalancer IPs from this designated network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Network Selection in Multi-Network Environments**

- Scenario: Nodes are attached to multiple Harvester VM networks (for example, `default/vlan-100` and `default/vlan-200`).
- Default behavior: The provider selects an interface non-deterministically based on discovery order.
- Goal: Force the provider to allocate load balancer IPs and report node IPs exclusively from a designated network (for example, `default/vlan-100`).
```

```yaml
extraArgs:
  - "--management-network=default/vlan-100"
```

**Example 2.2: Dual-Stack Interfaces in Single-Stack (IPv4-Only) Clusters**

> When cluster nodes receive both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, harvester-cloud-provider may default to reporting both of the IP addresses as the node's `InternalIP`. Setting `--node-ip-cidr` instructs the provider to select the matching IPv4 address as the primary `InternalIP` (relegating the IPv6 address to `ExternalIP`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Dual-Stack Interfaces in Single-Stack (IPv4-Only) Clusters**

- Scenario: Nodes are assigned both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses in an IPv4-only cluster.
- Default behavior: The provider may report both addresses as `InternalIP`.
- Goal: Ensure the IPv4 address is assigned as the primary `InternalIP`, relegating the IPv6 address to `ExternalIP`.
```

```yaml
extraArgs:
  - "--node-ip-cidr=192.168.1.0/24"
```

**Example 2.3: Excluding Secondary IP Ranges on the Same Network (e.g., Split Subnets)**

When cluster nodes have multiple IPv4 addresses configured on the same management network interface (`default/vlan-100`), such as `192.168.100.0/25` for node management and `192.168.100.128/25` reserved strictly for cluster-internal usage (like internal traffic or storage), the provider defaults to assigning the first IPv4 as `InternalIP` and automatically publishing the second IPv4 as `ExternalIP`.

To enforce your network design and prevent internal secondary IPs on the same interface from leaking into Kubernetes node status as `ExternalIP`, combine all three flags:

1. `--management-network`: Selects the target network interface.

1. `--node-ip-cidr`: Locks the primary InternalIP selection to the node management subnet range.

1. `--node-exclude-ip-ranges`: Excludes the secondary IP range from being reported as `ExternalIP`.

```yaml
extraArgs:
    - "--management-network=default/vlan-100"
    - "--node-ip-cidr=192.168.100.0/25"
    - "--node-exclude-ip-ranges=192.168.100.128/25"

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
**Excluding Secondary IP Ranges on the Same Network**

- Scenario: Nodes have multiple IPv4 addresses on the same management interface (`default/vlan-100`), such as `192.168.100.0/25` for node management and `192.168.100.128/25` for internal storage.
- Default behavior: The provider assigns the first IPv4 address as `InternalIP` and automatically publishes the second IPv4 address as `ExternalIP`.
- Goal: Enforce network boundaries and prevent secondary internal subnets from leaking into Kubernetes node status as `ExternalIP`.

```yaml
extraArgs:
  - "--management-network=default/vlan-100" # Specifies the target network interface
  - "--node-ip-cidr=192.168.100.0/25" # Locks the primary internal IP selection to the node management subnet range
  - "--node-exclude-ip-ranges=192.168.100.128/25" # Prevents the secondary IP range from being reported as ExternalIP
```
````

Combined Production Example:

> Combining these flags ensures strict, predictable InternalIP selection and prevents secondary networks or split subnets from leaking into ExternalIP status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Production Multi-Network Stack**

- Goal: Combine strict network selection, subnet binding, range exclusion, and runtime flags for a deterministic production configuration.
```

    - "--disable-annotation-alpha-provided-ip-addr=true"
    - "--show-full-help-on-error=true"
```

:::note

A Known Limitation: Rancher Manager UI IP Synchronization:

`harvester-cloud-provider` correctly applies these network flags and updates the Kubernetes Node object status (`InternalIP / ExternalIP`). However, Rancher Manager UI does not dynamically re-sync node IP changes in its UI if they are updated after initial node registration (for more details, see [Harvester Issue 10381](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10381#issuecomment-5264412173)).

- **Example Scenario**: On an IPv4-only cluster where nodes initially report both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses as InternalIP, specifying --node-ip-cidr enables harvester-cloud-provider to successfully filter the Kubernetes Node status down to IPv4 only. However, the Rancher UI may continue displaying the unsynced IP information in its dashboard.

- **Workaround**: Set these network parameters in `extraArgs` during initial cluster bootstrapping. If applying these flags to an existing cluster, a cluster redeployment is required for Rancher UI to reflect the updated node metadata.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Limitation: Rancher UI IP Synchronization

The Harvester Cloud Provider correctly applies network flags and updates Kubernetes node status (`InternalIP` or `ExternalIP`). However, the Rancher UI does not dynamically re-sync node IP changes if they are updated after initial node registration (see [issue #10381](https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/10381#issuecomment-5264412173)).

**Example**: On an IPv4-only cluster where nodes initially report both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses as `InternalIP`, specifying `--node-ip-cidr` enables the Harvester Cloud Provider to successfully filter the Kubernetes node status to IPv4 addresses only. However, the Rancher UI may continue displaying the unsynced IP information.

**Workaround**: Set network flags in `extraArgs` during initial cluster bootstrapping. Applying these flags to an existing cluster requires a cluster redeployment for the Rancher UI to reflect the updated node metadata.
```

### Embedded Kube-vip Integration

`harvester-cloud-provider` integrates with `kube-vip` to provision and manage Virtual IPs for Kubernetes `LoadBalancer` services.

#### Disabling embedded kube-vip

> If you want `harvester-cloud-provider` to retain its LoadBalancer IP allocation and management logic (such as pool-based IP assignment), but prefer using another LoadBalancer tool or external BGP/ARP speaker to handle VIP traffic routing, you can disable the embedded `kube-vip` sub-chart:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Embedded `kube-vip` Integration

The Harvester Cloud Provider integrates with `kube-vip` to provision and manage virtual IPs for Kubernetes `LoadBalancer` services.

#### Disabling the Embedded `kube-vip`

If you want the Harvester Cloud Provider to retain its load balancer IP allocation logic (such as pool-based IP assignment), but prefer using an external BGP/ARP speaker or alternative tool to handle VIP traffic routing, disable the embedded `kube-vip` sub-chart:
```

```yaml
kube-vip:
  enabled: false
```

#### Support service `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`

By default, kube-vip runs exclusively on control-plane nodes. To support `externalTrafficPolicy: Local` for LoadBalancer services, traffic must be routed directly to nodes hosting workload pods. This requires two configuration changes:

1. Enable service leader election by setting `svc_election: "true"`.

1. Expand `kube-vip.affinity` rules so kube-vip pods run on worker nodes in addition to control-plane nodes.

```yaml
kube-vip:
  env:
    svc_election: "true"
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane
            operator: Exists
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/worker
            operator: Exists

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
#### Configuring Support for `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`

By default, `kube-vip` runs exclusively on management nodes. To support `externalTrafficPolicy: Local` for `LoadBalancer` services, traffic must route directly to nodes hosting active workload pods.

1. Enable service leader election by setting `svc_election: "true"` in the `kube-vip` environment configuration.

1. Expand `kube-vip.affinity` rules so `kube-vip` pods run on both management nodes and worker nodes.

    ```yaml
    kube-vip:
    env:
        svc_election: "true"
    affinity:
        nodeAffinity:
        requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            nodeSelectorTerms:
            - matchExpressions:
            - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane
                operator: Exists
            - matchExpressions:
            - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/worker
                operator: Exists
    ```
````

:::important

Best Practice: Ensure the node coverage for `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`.

Deploying `kube-vip` across all nodes in the guest cluster is strongly recommended when using `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`.

Because `kube-vip` requires a co-located workload pod on the same node to elect a leader and advertise the VIP:

- **No common nodes**: If `kube-vip` runs only on `control-plane` nodes while workload pods run exclusively on `worker` nodes, `kube-vip` cannot elect a leader and will not advertise the VIP for that service.

- **Partial overlap**: If `kube-vip` runs on a subset of worker nodes (e.g., `node1`, `node2`) while workload pods run on `node2` and `node3`, only the overlapping node (`node2`) can be elected to advertise the VIP.

> In both cases, the `high availability (HA)` of the LoadBalancer service is significantly compromised or lost entirely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info important

**Best Practice: Ensure Node Coverage for `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`**

Deploying `kube-vip` across all nodes in the guest cluster is strongly recommended when using `externalTrafficPolicy: Local`.

Because `kube-vip` only elects a leader and advertises a VIP on nodes that actively host workload pods, restricting pod scheduling creates the following coverage gaps:

- **No common nodes**: If `kube-vip` runs only on management nodes while workload pods run exclusively on worker nodes, `kube-vip` cannot elect a leader and will fail to advertise the VIP for that service.

- **Partial overlap**: If `kube-vip` runs on a subset of worker nodes (for example, `node1` and `node2`) while workload pods run on `node2` and `node3`, only the overlapping node (`node2`) can advertise the VIP.

In both scenarios, the high availability aspect of the `LoadBalancer` service is severely compromised or lost entirely.
```

- **Centralized Management**:
    Running a defined number of Pods (as a Deployment rather than a per-node DaemonSet), it centrally queries and watches metadata for every node (VM) across the guest cluster via standard K8s API interactions.

- **CCM Framework Alignment & Flag-Based Control**:
    Built directly on top of the Kubernetes Cloud Controller Manager (CCM) framework, it uses standard public flags alongside extended Harvester flags (`--flag`) to modularly toggle controllers (such as standard CCM controllers or the custom VMI controller) and fine-tune networking behavior to match complex cluster setups.

:::

### Backward Compatibility Notice

:::note

> Please note a known backward compatibility issue if you're using the Harvester cloud provider version **v0.2.2** or higher. If your Harvester version is below **v1.2.0** and you intend to use newer RKE2 versions (i.e., >= `v1.26.6+rke2r1`, `v1.25.11+rke2r1`, `v1.24.15+rke2r1`), it is essential to upgrade your Harvester cluster to v1.2.0 or a higher version before proceeding with the upgrade of the guest Kubernetes cluster or Harvester cloud provider.

Author: this block of content is outdated, hence remove it

:::

## Instance Lifecycle Management

> ## Load Balancer Support

Reviewer: Why is the `Instance Lifecycle Management` section empty? If that heading is supposed to be the parent of `Load Balancer Support` and subsequent sections, the markup should be changed accordingly.
